I will say just for myself and I am very
hesitant to announce things as
transphobic without having opportunity
to try to have conversations and that
that's where I am right now where you're
here right now.
>> Yes, I'm here with you. I want to
understand where people's anxieties are.
I want to [music] find places where we
might agree.
[music]
What actually defines transgender
identity? Are transgender rights still
the next frontier [music] of civil
rights?
>> Effective immediately, transgender
Americans may serve openly.
>> The New [music] Zealand weightlifter
Laurel Hubard is set to become the first
transgender [music] athlete to compete
at the Olympics.
>> Cataluna Enriquez made history as the
first openly transgender woman to win
the competition.
>> Or are they [music] the place where
social liberalism has finally hit a
limit?
And is peace available in this culture
war? Or is the chasm [music] just too
wide? My guest today is a lawyer for the
ACLU, a trans rights [music] activist,
and the first transgender person to
argue a case before the Supreme Court,
Chase Strangio. Welcome to Interesting
Times.
>> Thank you for having me, Ross.
>> It's a pleasure. So, we're going to talk
about where the fight over transgender
rights is going. We're going to try and
get into some deeper philosophical
waters. We'll see how that goes. Uh but
I want to start with your own legal work
because you were a lawyer on two, right,
of the biggest Supreme Court cases on
transgender rights. Uh one in 2020 and
one in 2024,
right?
>> Correct.
>> Yes.
>> And so in the first case, you were on
the winning side. In the second one, you
lost. Both were six to three decisions.
And so I thought we'd start by just
having you talk through both of those
cases as a way of grounding our
conversation. So the first one is Bosto
versus Clayton County. What did that
case ask the Supreme Court to decide?
>> Yeah. So Bosto vers Clayton County,
Georgia was actually three cases that
came up to the Supreme Court together.
[snorts] And the facts in those cases
were simply that two gay men were fired
from their jobs when their employer
learned that they were gay and one
transgender woman was fired from her job
when her employer learned that she was
trans. And by the time the cases got to
the Supreme Court, the only question was
whether or not Title 7's prohibition on
sex discrimination, Title 7 of the Civil
Rights Act,
>> included prohibitions on discrimination
and employment because someone is gay or
transgender. When it reached the Supreme
Court, it was a question of pure law of
whether the Title 7 covered
discrimination against LGBT people. And
our argument was that it is sex
discrimination to fire someone for being
gay or to fire someone for being
transgender. And the argument went if a
man comes to work and says that he
married Mary over the weekend and that's
totally fine. But if a woman comes to
work and said she married Mary over the
weekend and is fired, it's but for their
sex that the firing took place. That is
a form of sex discrimination prohibited
by the statute. Similarly with
transgender status if an employer says
everyone named Mary come to my office
and there's four Marys at the office and
then they say Mary who had a birth
assigned sex of male you're fired um
because you can't come to work as Mary
uh and the argument was it was because
of sex that is prohibited under the
plain language of title 7 and in a 6 to3
ruling uh written by justice Gorsuch the
court ruled in favor of of the employees
who had been fired.
>> And so Gorsuch and Robert, John Roberts,
right, both joined the decision. So it
was the four liberal justices who you
would expect to be sympathetic to those
arguments and then the two two
conservative or right-leaning justices.
Why do you think they both joined and of
course obviously wrote the decision?
>> Yeah. So we litigated that case using a
straightforward textualist theory that
we thought would appeal to Justice
Gorsuch who is an avowed textualist. And
that went basically like it does not
matter what Congress intended in 1964 in
terms of the applications of the law.
What matters is the words that they used
and they said, you know, no employment
discrimination because of sex. And as pe
as commentators have often talked about
with respect to this case, the shadow
justice uh in the case who was obviously
not in the case because he had died was
Justice Scalia because both the majority
and the disscent were trying to channel
who was approaching this case most like
Justice Scalia. And Justice Scalia had
written a famous opinion called on call
in which he had said that same-sex
sexual harassment is prohibited by title
7 even if that was not one of the
intended consequences when Congress
passed Title 7 in 1964. And so our
argument was look look at the words of
the statute no discrimination because of
sex. You don't have to decide what sex
means. That was not what the case was
about. We said whatever definition you
want of sex, the answer still holds that
these individual employees were fired
because of their sex. And I think that
appealed to a textualist approach to uh
legal interpretation. Justice Gorsuch
went through methodically the Supreme
Court's cases interpreting Title 7 and
this fit, I think, squarely within it.
just to stay with the the details of the
sort of would be textualist decision in
the case of the transgender person,
right? It's the the idea in that
argument that the court accepted is that
someone who is born biologically male
and goes to work and presents as female
is being discriminated against because
someone who was born as a biological
female could present as female with no
issue. What essential like
manifestations of transgender identity
are covered? Well, I mean, in a sense,
it's not even necessarily hinged to
transgender identity. What it's hinged
to is, can you do something that someone
of a different sex could not do? And so,
it could be, you know, if I wanted to go
to the ACLU and say, "I'm Chase." And
the ACLU says, "No, because you were
assigned female at birth, but someone
assigned male at birth could come to the
ACLU uh as Chase." That would also be an
example of sex discrimination prohibited
by title 7. I don't have to declare a
transgender identity to for this logic
to apply. In Amy's case, the case that
was at the Supreme Court, she in essence
had worked for this um funeral home for
many years and had written a letter
saying, "This is who I am. I have
struggled with it. I've thought about it
for a long time and after a vacation I'm
going to come to work as Amy following
the dress code for women and using the
name of Amy and that was the
manifestation she articulated but if she
didn't say she was transgender and she
had said you know I want to come to work
looking less like a traditional man um
and they said well you you know you
can't do that because of X I think that
also articulates a theory of sex
discrimination that title 7 recognizes.
So it wasn't actually hinged to you know
sexual orientation or transgender status
as such. It was just recognizing that in
the circumstances before the court the
individuals were fired because of their
sex.
>> All right. Now let's go forward and talk
about United States versus Skirmetti
which was argued last year and decided
just this year. This was presented to a
slightly different but similarly divided
Supreme Court. Uh it was a challenge to
Tennesseeey's ban on certain forms of
care, what gets called gender affirming
care for transgender adolescence. What
was the argument before the court there?
>> Yeah. So, so as you note there there's a
Tennessee law issue here and and the law
prohibits puberty blockers and and
hormone therapies uh only when they're
per prescribed to to treat gender
dysphoria and transgender adolescence.
And if I could just take like a brief
moment to say what gender dysphoria is
just because I think that can be helpful
for understanding the case since we have
both the legal doctrine and then the
science that's underpinning a lot of it.
So gender dysphoria is a condition that
is characterized by clinically
significant distress that flows from the
discordance between a person's gender
identity. So the core of their
understanding of their gender and their
sex assigned at birth. Um and the one of
the ways that this condition is treated
is through medical interventions that
aim to minimize that very serious
distress. And when minors are treated
with these medications, it is done with
the consent of their parents um and the
recommendation of their doctors. And so
in Tennessee, these were medications
that were available to treat gender
dysphoria in both adults and
adolescence. Tennessee passes a law that
categorically bans these medications and
um that leaves families like our
ultimate clients in the case without
access to medical care in their in their
home state for their minor children. And
we sued uh Tennessee and we are we we
made two legal arguments. The first was
that these bans on medical treatment
because they hinged the prohibition on
the medication on an individual sex
violated the equal protection rights of
transgender adolescence. So a similar
argument to the one that we were talking
about with respect to bosto. And then we
made an argument on behalf of the
parents that these laws infringed upon
the fundamental rights of parents to
direct the medical care of their minor
children. And this would be a right that
is found in the substantive component of
the due process clause of the 14th
amendment. And those were the were the
two claims that were raised in in that
case. By the time it got to the Supreme
Court and what would become United
States versati, only the equal
protection claim was before the court.
>> Just to be clear, when we're talking
about care in this case for gender
dysphoria, we are specifically talking
about drugs that delay or halt puberty.
>> Yeah. So the pubertal suppressants so
the the the medications that that halt
puberty um after the onset of of puberty
and then hormone therapy. So after uh
you know some whether it's a 16 or a
17year-old who is then receiving hormone
therapy to undergo either a typical male
or typical female hormonal puberty. And
those were the two sets of medications
that were at issue in in the case. And
the way the Tennessee statute uh drafted
the prohibition was to say that
medications like these can be prescribed
only when they are consistent with sex.
And so when we were at the Supreme
Court, our argument was focusing on that
language as a sex classification under
the equal protection clause.
>> Right. And you lost.
>> We did. So, and you lost the two
justices specifically who had written
and joined the decision in Bastto. Um, I
guess can you gloss in a completely fair
and even-handed way why they ruled the
way they did?
>> Um, yeah. I mean, so I I I guess I I
want to say first that it was a really
hard decision to decide what to do here
when we lost at the appeals court. Um
the reality for our clients was was
devastating. Um these were parents who
had watched their kids suffer who then
had found a medication that was was
helping them. Um and I think everyone in
the case agreed that this was a context
in which there are kids suffering. Um
and so then the disagreement is well
what do you do about it? And the parents
in this case our clients found something
to do about it. They you know they
worked with their doctors. they learned
a lot about the condition. They waited
years in many cases before doing any
interventions. And so we were watching
health care uh be taken away from
families across the country. Um and at
the same time we were looking at options
in which you accept a series of losses
and care remains banned in 50% of the
country or you go to the court and say
even if you think there's a
justification for this ban, you you
should agree with us that it's based on
sex because unlike in Title 7, there's a
two-part inquiry. So this was under the
equal protection clause because it was
the government. The first part is what
is the basis by which the government is
making a distinction. Is it based on sex
or is it based on something else? And if
it's based on sex, then it just means
the government has to carry their burden
to show that that use of sex is
justified. And this is what's called the
levels of scrutiny under the equal
protection clause. So, our main argument
to the court was, you don't have to
decide if Tennessee's law is
constitutional or unconstitutional, but
we want you to reverse the lower court's
decision that it wasn't based on sex.
So, that was ultimately what we did and
what we tried. Um, and they didn't agree
with us. And the reason that they held
that the law was not based on sex was
that they thought that it was a
classification based on medical use. Um,
which we wouldn't dispute that it is
also a classification based on on
medical use. If you are prescribing
puberty blockers for early onset
puberty, that's you're treating
something different than if you are
providing it for for gender dysphoria.
>> And you are just in these cases, you are
prescribing it to both male and female
children. Right. It didn't say you can
only prescribe it to male children or
you could only prescribe it to female
children. Right.
>> That's right. But I think that I would
say that's not the reason we lost.
Although that was part of why did you
why did you lose? But I think it's
important to explain why that's not the
reason, which is because the the equal
protection clause does protect
individuals. So there are examples where
the court has said, you know, permpary
strikes when when you're striking
jurors, you can strike as many men or as
many women, but if you're doing it based
on sex, it's impermissible. So it's not
a group based protection. It's an
individual one. Um, and we thought, and
I think we were right, the court
obviously disagreed that the medical use
imposed a sex classification that John
Doe, our client, couldn't get
testosterone because his sex assigned at
birth was female. Um, and he could get
testosterone if his sex assigned at
birth was male. Even if there are
different medical purposes, in some
instances, there are often the same
medical purpose, which is to prompt a
male puberty.
And you
>> but it's well it's I'm I don't want to
go too far down the rabbit hole, but it
is a it is a treatment for a different
condition.
>> But what makes the prohibition operative
is whether the treatment is inconsistent
with a person's sex or consistent with a
person's sex. If if two people named
John go to the doctor's office and they
say, you know, I am a boy and I I'm not
developing my p my puberty in accordance
with my my peers. I need
testosterone,
>> right?
>> It
>> if you go in and you say, "I'm
developing my puberty
to reflect a sex that I do not believe
myself to be," you don't get it. But
those seem like different things.
>> Well, and so and the court thought that
this that that if you change the sex,
you change the condition and that was
dispositive. Our view was that if you
hold constant the purpose, then you
change the sex and the outcome is is
different.
>> So yeah, let's we'll save we'll save the
rabbit holes for a moment.
>> Why just whether as a legal matter or a
political matter, why do you think this
kind of argument persuaded two
conservative justices in the first case
and not in the second? Well, I I mean I
think there are several reasons. Um I
think the first reason just in terms of
the legal paradigms, the first case was
a statutory case. This was a
constitutional case. The interpretive
frameworks for con the constitution are
different. Um usually the court
recognizes that something that is sex
discrimination uh under title 7 would be
sex discrimination under the
constitution. Um and in this context the
court disagreed with our analysis of the
logic of why it was but for an
individual sex and they agreed with us
in the title 7 context. I do think as
often happens some of the atmospherics
and some of the anxieties that animated
this litigation that animates these
conversations made their way into the
framework.
>> Yeah. I mean that's part of what I
wanted to ask you about those do you
feel like just generally the political
context of these decisions changed in
the first case in Bosto you're talking
about issues related to transgender
adults and in the second case you're
talking about issues related to minors
and it seems like to me that a lot of
the shift in the politics of this issue
over the last four or five years is
connected to that shift and how
Americans feel about adult decision-m
versus children and teenage decision-m.
>> Yeah. I mean, I want to disentangle sort
of the political from the legal. I
obviously they are they are connected um
in as a doctrinal matter, the fact that
it would be a minor versus an adult
wouldn't change whether it was based on
sex. And that was one of the things that
we raised for the court, which is by
this logic, if Tennessee's law had
banned this care for adults, that would
also be okay. Um, and so that was
something that analytically was
important. Um, I also think something
that was lost in this is yes, these are
these are minors and we want to be able
to have conversations about how to best
protect and care for minors. But two
important things that are true in this
context. One is it was their parents who
were making decisions and we as parents
have to weigh all sorts of questions
when we're making medical decisions for
our minor children, which we do of
course in conversation with them and
their doctors. And then the the the
second thing that I also think is
important that um that was lost here is
that these bans these categorical bands
they did not leave room for
conversations. They did not leave room
for more research. Last question on this
sort of legal legal environment cuz you
mentioned already that the decision to
go to the court with this case knowing
you might well lose was a difficult one.
After the ruling was handed down, there
was a lot of argument and discussion,
including in an essay by one of my
colleagues, Nicholas Confesaori, about
whether this had been a huge mistake for
the transgender rights movement. You
yourself were criticized by a number of
people um for these decisions. I'm just
curious if you can say a little more
about whether in hindsight you think,
you know, knowing what you know now,
would you have made the same decision to
take this case all the way to the court?
Well, so I guess the first thing I want
to say is it certainly wasn't my
decision alone and this is and I think
it's really important because these are
there are clients and there are uh many
many people who are involved in
assessing what we do in any given
moment. Um and I I simply can't you know
wield the power to make such a decision
as this. Um and at the same time I I
will say that the in in November 2023
when we made the decision um to you know
collectively go to the Supreme Court
with this uh that I think that there
were more people who were with us at
that time. Um, it was, you know, I by
the time it got to the court, I do think
things had had changed in in the public.
But when we were litigating these cases
in the in the lower courts in 2022 and
2023, seven district court judges,
including three appointed by Donald
Trump, had struck down these laws. Um,
and that was the context. And then when
that shifted and these bans started to
go into effect, families that had never
left Arkansas or Alabama or Tennessee
uprooted their entire lives to to care
for their children to try to find
medical care. That felt like a dire set
of of conditions and I think it was um
the right decision then because the
reality as well was there was already a
circuit split. the it was going to the
court and even more so questions about
sports and questions about bathrooms
were also about to get to the court and
so it was a hard calculus and a and a
chessboard of harm and moving pieces and
I just I don't think in any of these
contexts are there easy decisions. Um,
and I wish that we had more tools now to
fight back against the kind of attacks
that we're seeing from the Trump
administration that uh were very much
blunted by the screetti decision. Uh,
and also I think it was important to
fight back from the lower court decision
which importantly was much broader than
the Supreme Court's decision. um because
the sixth circuit decision that we
appealed from had also cut off a lot of
avenues of advocacy that the Supreme
Court did not
>> like give me an example. So, um, one
example is that the the sixth circuit
had said that, uh, discrimination
against trans people by the government
does not warrant any special scrutiny.
Um, that you can just defer to the
legislature in those contexts. And the
Supreme Court said, "We're not going to
reach that question." And the lower
court also said that Bosto uh, the title
7 case only applies to title 7. And the
Supreme Court said, "We're not answering
that question about the scope of Bosto's
logic." So,
>> what would a larger scope mean? A larger
scope would mean and and we're going to
be at the Supreme Court again, so they
may answer some of these questions. So,
a larger scope would mean that uh you
know, if uh a trans kid is kicked out of
school for being trans, there is no
constitutional claim potentially and no
uh title N claim.
>> So, Bosto applies to employers and so
the open question is
>> issues of you know mil the military,
housing, education and so on. Those are
still in play. Okay. Okay. That's that's
useful. Um, yeah, we've talked a couple
times about the idea of a changing
political climate, but I want to just
just sort of pause for a minute and talk
about definitions. For listeners who,
you know, may not have sort of deep
experience with some of these debates.
Just a basic question from your
perspective. What does it mean to be
transgender?
>> A transgender person is someone with a
gender identity. So their core
understanding of their gender that
differs from the sex that they were
designated at birth.
>> Okay. What does it mean to have a male
or female sex assigned at birth as
distinct from [snorts] being male or
female in biological terms? What does
that distinction mean? I guess to me um
what that distinction means is at birth
when our children are born by and large
a doctor looks at their genitals and
says
>> you know you have a penis we're going to
put M you have a vagina we're going to
put F. Um and that is one you know the
external genitalia are one facet of the
biological components of of sex. um and
there are others chromosomes, hormones,
secondary sex characteristics and I
would include within my understanding of
sex how we see ourselves. So these are
different aspects of our our biological
sex. And then um what differs from the
sex we are given based on our genitals
at birth and and whether we are a boy or
a girl or a man or a woman I think is
most of the time
we see ourselves exactly as the genital
check
>> confirmed. Most people do. Um, and then
that there are some of us who uh don't
there's something just fundamental and
deep about the fact that that wasn't the
right way of seeing us. And so I would
say a man or a woman is someone who
understands in their core that they are
a man or a woman.
Is there a distinction though between
like is there a distinction between
gender identity and biological sex or is
this just a continuum?
>> I I would say there's a distinction
distinction. So I do think the way I
understand it that our gender identity
does it I mean it's a you know it's in
our bodies it's in our minds has a
biological component. Um, I think
research suggests that there may be some
uh, you know, fetal hormonal exposures
that make it a biological phenomenon,
but I'm not saying it is biological sex
as as such. Um, I do think that often
times the the most salient biological
components of our sex diverge from our
gender identity. Um, and and those
things are the dis disconnect that make
someone trans. But when they do, you
wouldn't say this person has a a person
who the doctor looks at them and says
they have a vagina. They're they're a
girl. You wouldn't say that person is
biologically female but has a male
gender identity. You you you would say
they are just male full out. And there
may be some tension between that and
certain elements of their biology, but
it's not there's no split.
I would say that the per I mean look I I
actually am fine saying that you know
you
>> I'm not I'm honestly I'm not I'm not
trying to like ent [clears throat] trap
you in something. I'm I'm very
interested in No, I don't feel ent
the kind of categorization cuz I think
and we'll get to this in a second. I
think it's relevant to first of all
legal arguments in terms of like what I
mean let me put it to you this way right
like so
a core claim of the transgender rights
movement right is that transgender
identity deserves legal and
constitutional protection. It deserves
legal protection uh in the same way that
one's sex does and one's race does
>> deserves constitutional protection the
same way that one's religion does. But
these are all different kinds of things,
right? like race and sex are seen as
more about biology, ancestry, and so on
than than religion is. I I want to
understand where you think
transgender identity or gender identity,
however you want to phrase it, fits into
that landscape. Well, so I I guess I I
think it's important to separate what
we're talking about as a matter of law
and what we're talking about as a matter
of medicine because I do think that
legal prohibitions on sex discrimination
include transgender people. Full stop.
Right. Um and so that and and that what
we have seen in the last 10 years is the
emergence of a legal notion of
biological sex that has come into the
law that was new and the displacement of
sex as a legal category with biological
sex as a legal category is a new
phenomenon. It comes in 2016 at the
beginning of conversations of about
whether trans people should be able to
use the bathroom that matches with our
identity. So there's the question of how
do we understand sex in the law and
where does transgender status where do
transgender people fit in with that?
Then there's a medical scientific
question.
>> Okay, can I pause? Before 2016, do you
what how did people think about sex as a
category that was distinct from
biological differences between men and
women? What what what what do you mean
by that change in 2016? I think what we
saw what we thought of as sex as a
category was in essence in and this is
in the context of civil rights and
constitutional law that it is just
impermissible to discriminate against
someone because of their actual their
perceived their sex sex or their sex
stereotypes. So it didn't necessitate
defining sex. The the constitution or
civil rights statutes also don't define
race. You can be discriminated against
based on your actual or perceived race.
you could be discriminated against
because of [snorts] your actual
perceived sex. And so in that sense, if
we're talking about the paradigm that
prohibits discrimination, it didn't
necessitate defining sex. And so we
start to see this this impulse to define
sex for purposes of of sorting and
excluding trans people. That comes in in
2016. In that context, I think that the
definitions we see in the statutes that
emerge then say biological sex. And it I
will say it changes. First in 2016 it
says biological sex is what's on your
birth certificate. Then I think we start
to see definitions that are more about
genitals and then we start to see
definitions that are more about
chromosomes um and reproductive anatomy.
And that sort of changes over time over
the last 10 years. So that's that's the
law and I think that's obviously where
I'm most focused on how these terms take
on meaning. So earlier we were talking
about
gender dysphoria
>> as the ex as a medical psychological
term for the experience of
feeling like you are in the wrong body.
Does that imply then that transgenderism
should be perceived primarily as a
medical psychological condition
in search of treatment?
I think that transgender
identity and transgender people should
be understood based on the definition of
having a gender identity that's
different from sex at birth. I think
that there are for many transgender
people, particularly when you cannot
live in accordance with that gender
identity, a medical and psychological
set of needs that emerge to bring your
body to bring your outward expression
into alignment with who you know
yourself to be.
>> But presumably if tomorrow this, you
know, the state of Tennessee presented
medical and scientific evidence, this is
just a hypothetical, right? but
presented medical or scientific evidence
that there was a treatment, an
alternative treatment for
the experience of gender dysphoria that
reconciled the person's psychology to
their natal sex, the sex on their birth
certificate, their genitalia, whatever
else. Well, I'm curious what you would
say, but I'm I'm very skeptical that you
or any other transgender activist group
would say, "Okay, that's great. we're
going to prescribe this treatment to
teenagers expressing gender dysphoria.
You would say, well, that treatment
suppress works by suppressing who they
actually are.
>> So, I so the the treatment is aimed at
at the distress. And I I would say for
me I that if there was a treatment
tomorrow that said you could take this
medication and you could uh change your
gender identity or I you know, I guess
it depends on the premise. Um, if it
could change how I understood myself,
then it would be a question of, do I
like being a transgender person and
having this discordance or do I want to
go and and have a different experience?
I think the premise suggests that you
could change that gender identity and
then you'd make a decision about how it
is you want to live in the world uh
without distress. I I wouldn't say
nobody should have access to that if if
the premise is that you can make a
decision about how to live most safely
and comfortably in your body. Right now,
what we know is that forcing people to
live in a way that doesn't align with
their gender identity does cause
significant distress. and one medical
and set of medical interventions that
has shown to significantly reduce those
symptoms of distress, anxiety,
depression, and sui suicidality are
these hormone interventions that that
Tennessee has has banned. Um when
getting back to the question of sort of
what is the nature of transgender
identity I yeah
>> I I guess I I feel like we can't like
one reason that this issue is so fraught
is that it's very hard to escape that
question right because
you move back and forth we're both
moving back and forth between
language that seems appropriate to
something that would be characterized
ized as a, you know, a sort of
psychological disturbance in search of a
cure and language that would be
appropriate to the description of a
persecuted religious minority or women
or men discriminated against unjustly,
right? And I think you you want to
reconcile that tension by saying that
there are these symptoms of distress and
there is this medical treatment for
those symptoms that
works by effectively
confirming biologically the
psychological experience. Well, I I I
wouldn't say it's confirming because
that suggests it has a role in
reinforcing what the experience of one's
gender is. I think it is more aligning
one's outward appearance with their
understanding of of themselves.
>> But but it's more than appearance
surely, right? It is your your hormonal
experience, your biochemical experience,
I think we can both agree, is very hard
to separate from your psychological
experience, right? So, I mean, I I don't
want to like, you know, be be too
personal here, but can you talk about
your own experience a little bit or
>> Yeah. No, no, maybe that'll help make it
make it more more concrete. Um, and then
I also, you know, I do think it's
important to talk about, you know, sort
of how we're conceptualizing it in law
and how we're conceptualizing it in in
medicine, but, you know, my experience
is that I had no idea what it meant to
be transgender growing up. I, you know,
my first encounter with a transgender
person was Boys Don't Cry. Um, the film
about Brandon Tina, who was Hillary with
Hillary Swank, paying Brandon Tina and
that.
>> However, I
>> How old were you? How old were you?
>> Oh gosh. Um I was born in 1982 so this
is around 17 y um and
uh and my experience growing up is one
of alien self alienation from my body
but I did not have words for it. I
didn't have language for it. And in my
recollection of my childhood, I do not
recall ever thinking, "Oh, I am not a a
girl,
>> right?
>> I just knew I was unhappy. I was in
therapy. I, you know, did all of the
things that you're supposed to do and
had parents who loved me and tried to
support me." And I then continue to have
this sense of of distress and begin to
look for
more help as a young adult. So go to the
the go to therapy, talk to people. Um,
and what ends up happening is I get
diagnosed with gender dysphoria. I have
a therapist who's helping me work
through those.
>> You're in your 20s? I'm in my early 20s.
Yeah.
>> And I, you know, and I'm graduated from
college. I work at a law firm. I'm, you
know, I I am trying to pursue my life,
but I'm being held back by the sense
that I can't look in the mirror. I don't
want to shower. I don't want to go
outside. So, and throughout this time, I
should say I'm there's there's no real
access to the internet. There's no
social media. And I am
>> so you are as a teenager like okay
>> just a gender non-conforming teenager
and young adult who then comes out as
gay and is in and still just feels this
sense that it it's not a oh I'm
uncomfortable with my body as such but
my body is the wrong
>> right
>> body for me and but I don't have the
language for it. I think that ultimately
what what ends up happening is I have a
a a realization through lots of of
therapy that there is something called
transgender that that fits my experience
and that I start to then think about how
to align my body with my sense of myself
as male and my experience is not
representative of a lot of people I'll
say because I do as maybe you know is
noticeable I don't identify I don't
express myself in a very masculine
fashion. I try in little ways, but I
recognize that I'm going to have a
androgynous appearance. That is part of
how I see myself. Um, but then I did
spend time in my early 20s, you know,
having access to surgery, um, taking
hormones and starting to feel like
everything in my life that I had tried
to hide away, that I had tried to get
rid of
what made sense. And I was able, you
know, I I was able to go to law school.
I was able to become a lawyer that went
into court. Things that seemed
absolutely unimaginable to me before.
And recently when my mother was selling
the house that I grew up in and I went
back and was packing things up, I found
some old journals. And every single one
of those journals had these just painful
memories all that I just kept saying, "I
don't understand why I'm not a girl. I
don't understand why I'm not a girl."
And I can't explain it in words. These
visceral core feelings just like many
things that people don't understand
until they feel them. inherent to who we
are. Um, you know, I've I I talked to
members of my family who have ADHD who
are trying to explain to me what it's
like to be in in their brain. And it I I
it is I cannot imagine it. Um, and the
best I can do is recognize that I don't
understand it and also try to support
them in how they navigate in in the
world. And so that's a little bit how I
how I think about it. um or any other
you know aspect of our lives that we
can't articulate so well but feel so
core to who we are and when we look back
there ev there's all this evidence of
where it was in things that we didn't
have language for. Can you just say
something about
just just on the point about medical
interventions like how you felt
the connection between that sense of
sort of psychological change and
acceptance and
you know making making hormonal and
biological changes to your body.
>> Yeah. I mean and and again I you know
I'm saying this from my experience
everyone everyone's is is different. Um,
and I
I can the best I can say is it it felt
like coming home. Um, it felt like
resolving a long-standing period of of
homesickness and then finally getting
into your own bed. Um, and that enabled
me to feel like there was a place for me
in the world. Uh, that I didn't feel
before. Um, and you know, I had a a very
vibrant, full life, but I could not
occupy my body. And so that experience
then allows me to, you know, go to law
school, have a family, become a father,
do all of these things that I think I
always wanted, but if you're alienated
[snorts] from yourself, it's it's a lot
it's a lot harder. Um, and I've seen
that story with many people in my life.
Um, and then I've I've heard it from my
clients about their kids. And I
understand why people feel nervous when
it comes to kids. I I have a kid. I get
very anxious about bringing my kid to
the doctor and not understanding what
information I'm getting back. And I also
think that we as parents do a lot of
work
to help our children grow and thrive.
And I think my clients who made these
decisions for their children also did
that. So let's let's talk about that
difference for a minute because I think
that
the story that you just told or what you
just described
is something the the acceptance of
narratives like that
I think has been in certain ways at
least partially accepted in American
life. The language has changed right you
know people would say sex change
operation not gender affirming care and
so on. Um, but the idea of some form of
male to female or female to-male
transition in adulthood as a form of
psychological reconciliation goes back
decades in American life in in some
ways, right? And certainly by the time
you get to the late 2010s,
2020, and so on, um, I think there's
just sort of widespread acceptance in
American life that this is a free
country. People have these kind of
personal experiences.
They make these kind of choices. You
might be skeptical of those choices, but
they are things that sort of we make
space for in American life. From my from
my perspective, what changes in a big
way
and starting in the late 2010s and then
continuing into the present, right, is
that the argument from activists becomes
that these kind of treatments and
experiences should be available not just
to 20somes and 30somes and 50somes and
everyone else, right? But to children
and teenagers, minors. Um, and over that
same period, you get an absolute
explosion in transgender, non-binary,
gender non-conforming
self-identification among kids. and then
offering treatments that are, let's say,
debatable in their reversibility and
that have pretty profound effects on,
[snorts] you know, sort of your literal
body, fertility, all of these things
that that just introduces incredible
levels of danger of making the wrong
decision. I I mean and and I I know that
that is the view of of many people and
and and let me offer a a little bit of a
different perspective on sort of how
this emerges and and sort of some of the
things that you're pointing to because I
I would not say that the uh
>> beginnings of using these medications to
treat adolescence comes from activists.
Uh I think what we see is that
endocrinologists who are treating adults
are starting to see young people coming
into their clinics and trying to figure
out whether or not as often happens with
medicine and you have a treatment that
works for an adults and you you wonder
if you can start to use it in an
adolescent population and it emerges
through the medical community trying to
provide treatment for young people that
are that are coming into their offices
suffering. And this is this happens in
Europe first and then in the United
States in the late 90s and early 2000s.
So it's not that you have this all of a
sudden happen in in in 2010. Um, and
many of those clinics start to see very
significant improvements in the
populations that they're working with
and they continue to want to study them
and we start to see the rise of gender
clinics in the United States uh that are
treating young people
>> in a should be said a fairly deregulated
medical atmosphere relative to Europe,
right? The the US generally.
>> I [clears throat] mean, yes, I think
there's a lot of differences between the
US and and Europe. Absolutely. And I and
one of the ways that medical care in the
US is much worse uh than in many parts
of Europe is that we don't have good
access to mental health care. And I I
submit that's a very serious problem
across the board, especially in rural
communities and poor communities. And
these gender clinics are trying to
account for that. They're trying to
rather than have people go into either
more underground spaces, more dangerous
spaces, combine these
multid-disciplinary teams that are that
are aimed at treating young people in a
way that is supporting their mental
health, that is understanding any
co-occurring conditions and ensuring
that their parents understand all of the
risks and benefits of any potential
intervention. And that is my experience
in learning about these clinics which I
did not really interface with um until
care was started to be shut down in in
in 2021. Um but studying them I see them
as very highly uh sophisticated
wellunded research clinics at
institutions like like Boston Children's
Hospital uh like UCLA. Uh and so you you
have you have that model that is
emerging and I agree that it is a model
that you had did not have a lot of and
now we have a lot more of in in the
United States and they are meeting
patients needs. Um I don't see the
causal connection being we're providing
this care so there's more trans kids. I
think that
>> Oh, I yeah I I wouldn't I wouldn't say
it's necessarily a connection of the
clinics themselves providing the care. I
think that there is a broader
cultural shift that you know it would
take a different a different argument or
conversation to unpack, right? But that
there is sort of a a certain kind of
social cascade that follows from
uh honestly follows from debates about
samesex marriage and so on where
gender identity questioning your gender
identity sort of sort of thinking about
your gender identity as a distinctive
thing in the context of adolescence and
puberty and so on just becomes a broad
cultural phenomenon. And then it's the
combination of that, you know, that
cultural shift intersecting with the
existence of these clinics and these
kind of again very concrete medical
interventions
that creates a lot of anxiety. So if
you're a parent, right, like obviously
you've represented parents who are
deeply committed to the idea that they
are doing the absolute best thing for
their gender non-conforming or dysphoric
child, right? I have known parents,
liberal parents, progressive parents in
the context of the last five or six
years who have a child who is gender
non-conforming or selfidentifies as
trans over some period of time who are
also trying to do the best thing for
their kid but are living in a state of
deep fear and anxiety that if they say
the wrong thing, this child will be
persuaded by the cultural atmosphere to
do something to undertake a set of
medical interventions. that are
potentially irreversible and have
lifelong consequences. And I'm curious
what you think about those kind of
fears.
>> Well, let me so so a few I think a few
important important points. One is that
a very small percentage of people who
are transgender ever go to a gender
clinic, then the number of people who
then have access to treatment is even
much smaller. So, we have a significant
amount of of gatekeeping here uh at at
at many levels. Um some people don't
recognize that they have a dysphoria.
They may identify as transgender, never
go to the clinic. Uh then within that
it's you know you you get smaller and
smaller into the actual number of people
who then are diagnosed with gender
dysphoria and assessment and then
assessed to have a a need for for
medical intervention. And then I also
want to be clear that many of these
young people are not experiencing
dysphoria for the first time at puberty.
There are many young people who have a
consistent and persistent in
presentation and insistence of
themselves uh as girls uh who are s male
at birth from very young ages including
in families where the parents have no
idea what it means to be transgender and
they are learning about it over time
after many years of confusion about what
is going on with their child. I think
that I will say as a parent I understand
having all sorts of fears about what my
kid is going to see on social media,
what is going to happen at at school. Uh
and I think we're primed to have a lot
of anxiety about our children. And I
personally feel that a lot of the
anxiety I have about my child is very
reasonable. I also don't think that
there is an incentive for people to
become trans uh in in the world. This
idea that if the parent says the wrong
thing, the child will then go become
transgender is not something I've seen
borne out.
>> I I wouldn't say that it's I I think
that's a slight oversimplification of
what I mean. It's more parents who have
children who are already identifying as
transgender. The parent has strong
doubts about the permanence and
durability of that identification but is
afraid that if they resist it too
strongly they will get a reaction from
the child that pushes them further
towards the funnel of medical and
surgical interventions. That's that's
that's what I mean. Yeah, I understand.
Yeah. So, I I would I would say what I
what I want is space for parents and
children and doctors to have these
conversations, not for that child to
express a a a transgender identity and
then go get hormones the next day. Not
at all. But I I do think it's really
damaging when you have the government
coming in and saying, "We're we're
cutting off this intervention. Um we're
not studying it. We're not putting in
safeguards." West Virginia took a very
different approach at first. So, we had
a law in West Virginia that said, "We're
going to provide more oversight." Um,
that's one of the ways that we as
legislators regulate medicine is to
identify a problem over prescription of
opioids. Uh, lack of informed consent
for gastric bypass. All of this for
minors as well. We're not going to ban
those procedures, but we are going to
require stringent informed consent
requirements. Um, additional doctor's
notes of assessments. And that's what
West Virginia said. They said, "You need
two independent assessments as a minor
before you can have access to these
medication and then put in place a very
particular informed consent
requirement." Um, and nobody challenged
that law. People followed that law.
>> Do you think that law addressed a real
problem with sort of clinics moving too
quickly? Do you think there were clinics
that moved too quickly from diagnosis to
prescription? Uh well, so I don't
necessarily think that the existing
safeguards that we have for medical
malpractice and other oversightes uh
didn't weren't enough, but I I think as
in all of medicine that absolutely there
are probably examples where things were
prescribed without the oversight needed
that things were moving too fast in some
places. I you know I will say I've seen
that in aspects of my child's medical
care outside this context and we can
sort of assess that there are differing
views about how serious it is here as
opposed to other contexts but I
certainly don't think that the problems
with medicine in this country uh that
that gender affirming care that medical
care for gender dysphoria was immune
from those problems. Um, and if a
legislature had concerns and documented
evidence of that, I think that is an
appropriate solution to those set of
concerns. Not saying we're going to ban
the care, we're going to cut off your
treatment. Um, because I think that's
really, really different than what
legislators usually do when they have a
concern about overprescription, lack of
assessments. There are other mechanisms
that the law has short of a categorical
ban.
>> Right. But in part, I think you have to
see some of these legislative responses.
One, they're in a certain kind of
continuity with shifts in Western
Europe, which is not sort of relig
particularly religious or republican
territory, let's say, right? But you
have a number of European countries that
have sort of taken taken steps to impose
sort of much stricter regulations on the
use of some of these practices and
protocols. But then the other the other
background here, right? And you know,
American politics is always operating in
this space of sort of backlash
overreach, backlash, overreach. The
narrative that I heard from transgender
activists in again like 2019 to 2023 and
so on was often like not just, you know,
there is some discreet number of
children who need this kind of care and
we want to make sure they get it. The
narrative was often people who say that
most children who express some kind of
gender dysphoria ultimately desist and
become reconciled to their natal sex.
That's transphobia. That was a pretty
clear line of argument that was used in
specific cases to attack specific
practices and doctors who were who were
themselves arguing that lots of
teenagers who experience dysphoria are
better off um with some kind of
treatment that tries to reconcile them
rather than a treatment that interrupts
puberty and so on. Would you agree that
that argument existed and had still has
real potency? Well, so to so I I will
say just for myself and I am very
hesitant to announce things as
transphobic without having opportunity
to try to have conversations. And that
that's where I am right now. You're here
right now.
>> Yes, I'm here with you. I want I do
because I want to understand where
people's anxieties are. I want to find
places where we might agree. Um, and I
do think that there is a lot of
confusion about some of the science
related to gender non-conforming young
kids, what happens at puberty. Um, so I
I agree that there are a lot of young
people who express gender non-conforming
expressions, behaviors, who are not
trans, who will never be trans. I mean,
so I'm not a doctor and I I do think
that neither neither am I that we have
to that
>> I have some strong medical opinions
notwithstanding.
>> Yes, as do I. But I am trying to limit
my expertise to where it's warranted. Um
but I do trust child and adolescent
psychiatrists to assess based on
existing diagnostic criteria. And so a
child who is persistently and
consistently for years
saying they are a girl versus a child
who paints their nails and wears dresses
um and in other ways is is gender
non-conforming assuming both these
children are assigned male at birth. I
think there is a difference. I think
that child and adolescent psychiatrists
assess these differences, talk to the
parents and then the question is ah
after the onset of puberty, is there a a
distress that is prompted for those
children with those consistent and
persistent uh identifications that are
different from their sex assigned at
birth? I do not want a parent to feel
like they can't have a conversation with
members of their community or trans
adults or doctors um without being
afraid of being called transphobic. And
that is something I feel really strongly
about. Like I I want us to be in a space
and I've maybe I've grown in this area
especially as a parent to say
the the last thing I want is for people
to feel like they uh can't ask
questions. So I at least in my life am
very committed to the asking of of
questions, the safe spaces for asking
questions. Maybe it doesn't have to just
be to you. Maybe some of us can open our
our you know ways of engaging and at the
same time when I think about the law
which is what I am focused on every day
in my life. It for a lot of these
questions there are just basic legal
principles that I still think should
apply. I still think that we should have
a check on the government's intrusion
into our family decision-m. I still
think that the equal protection clause
should apply to everyone. And I'm not
someone who is out there making policy.
I'm someone who's looking at the laws
that are being proposed that do exist
and assessing whether or not they are
violating our our constitution and civil
rights statutes.
>> All right. I have to ask you about the
specific case of sports. Um, and then we
can go back to the bigger picture to
finish up cuz sports are a slightly
different case where it's not so much
parents worrying about,
you know, a sort of social contagion
effect around gender identity. It's
parents worrying about basic unfairness
in competition. Um and it again sort of
comes back a bit to these initial
philosophical questions that we were
trying to wrestle with right about the
nature of sex and biological sex and so
on. But in the United States we have in
high schools and in colleges
um sports that are sex segregated. Is
that a good idea?
>> Uh yes. I am in favor of of sexarated
sports in most circumstances. And part
of it is part of the reason is and I'm
gonna I'm gonna lay on the plane, but I
want to bring us on a on a little detour
uh which is that so I so I've been doing
a lot of research about the origins of
of title 9. And so Title 9 is the civil
rights statute that uh bans sex
discrimination in education is largely
associated with sports. Although when it
was first passed by Congress in 1972,
there was a real set of questions about
whether it would apply to sports at all.
And so there is a uh Congress passes
another law a few years later that tells
the agency at the time, you have to come
up with regulations about sports. And
there's a huge uproar um in the sports
community in the men's sports community
because the idea of sharing resources
with women is intolerable. Um, and so
there ends up being uh a lot of effort
put into in critically important ways
the investment in women's sports. And I
think that the context of sports in
which we continue to have sex separation
is an important part of continuing that
promise of title 9. Now, do I think that
we need to have sexed sports because of
some concern about women not being able
to have access to sports teams if
they're not sex sexarated for the
reasons that you identify? Yes, I accept
that premise that in the aggregate men
are
>> have athletic advantages in a majority
though not all sports and that one of
the ways that sex separation has worked
is to ensure those opportunities for
women. However, I do not think that's
the only reason. I also don't think
that's the relevant question when we
talk about trans inclusion in sports.
But I do I do accept that sexated sports
is an important part of preserving
women's opportunity in sports right now.
I mean I will tell you a story which is
that a school I won't say which school
but a school in my general vicinity
during the peak of uh what you know what
we call wokeness nowadays had uh a field
day that had traditionally had separate
sports for men and women and they
decided they needed to put the girls and
boys together and the reports from the
girls the next day was that they were
absolutely miserable because of course
the boys won I don't want to say all but
won most of the games. So what what is
wrong based on that reality with saying
that whatever else whatever whatever the
absolute truth about the nature of
transgender identity is if you have the
advantages of a biological male you
should compete in male sports. What's
wrong with that?
>> Well I I think there's two things that I
want to say that I think are wrong with
it when we're talking about categorical
exclusions. I am not disputing that
there are conversations to be had about
how we manage the inclusion of trans
people in in sports. But so if you have
a rule, as half the states in the
country do, that from sometimes
kindergarten through college, sometimes
sixth grade through college, no trans
girl can ever compete on a girl's team.
I think that that poses a problem for
two reasons. One, I think that
complete exclusion from athletic
opportunities that align with gender
identity, even practices, even
intramurals, even club teams, I think
violates the promise of of equality
under title 9 and and the equal
protection clause because if the
question is if you have an athletic
advantage, then you can't participate,
then why not in the non-competitive
spaces? That's the first piece of it.
And then the second is we do have a
group of young people who have never
gone through a male puberty. They
transitioned before they did. They
received puberty blockers. And all of
the evidence in those cases is that they
do not have that athletic advantage
because in the aggregate the driver of
athletic advantage is circulating
testosterone. They have never had that.
They've never gone through an endogenous
puberty. um and they too are
categorically barred from all women's
teams. So I think in those two
circumstances I would say it it it it
highlights that the breadth is the
problem.
>> So in in the last case I want to
stipulate that I think that argument
about the nature of the advantage is
contested but
let's say that it were true. Would then
the solution be to have a system of
basically like effectively strength
testing or hormonal analysis or
something like what you're objecting to
categorical bands but what is the case
by case approach that you're imagining?
>> Well, I I mean I think it depends on the
context but if we're talking about
competitive high school athletics my my
view is that it should be left to the
athletic associations to come up with a
rule that balances inclusion
>> and it's a copout. what would you're in
charge of the athletic association.
What's your rule?
>> Well, my my rule is not a rule that you
probably agree with. Um and then I'll
give you a rule that I think would be
the appropriate compromise. Um because
I'm in favor of talking about
compromise. So my rule would be that you
have to undergo hormone therapy um for a
period of time that is studied um for
the age group and then at that point you
can participate. We don't we don't test
individual athletic anything um in order
to participate um on a team um in boys
and girls. I think that we come up with
a rule, it's applied once you meet the
threshold, then you can participate um
and I think that balances equity,
inclusion, um and concerns about
athletic advantage. That would be my
proposal.
What I don't understand is why when we
propose things that our compromises were
met only with bands because another
option would be to say if you if you are
on puberty blockers if you went through
only uh female hormonal puberty um and
that you can you submit evidence to that
effect then what is the basis under the
argument about athletic advantage of
excluding that in individual
because there were examples of
associations that were starting to
impose more stringent rules that looked
like that and then this administration
forced those to go back to a categorical
ban. So I think there's just questions
about why are we categorically excluding
people and why are we going so young in
age.
>> So let me make a suggestion then for why
you have that resistance to compromise
right now. In part, it's rooted in a
sense that your side is interested in
compromise now that it is facing
cultural setbacks, but just a few years
ago was making taking a much more
maximalist position. And so it is a
normal feature of cultural contest and
democratic politics, right? That if you
overreach, then your protestations that
you only want compromise uh might fall
sometimes on deaf ears, right? And
again, in the case of women's sports,
I don't know exactly what the ideal
medical testing regime that, you know,
you would have that would enable certain
transgender athletes to play. I'm open
to an argument about that, but I just
lived through a period where regardless
of what a medical test said, I could
look at a photograph of someone like
Leah Thomas, you know, who was extremely
successful uh as a female swimmer, and
you could you could just look at the
photographs of Leah Thomas with female
teammates. And from my own point of
view, it looked absurd. It looked like
absurd overreach on the part of the
transgender rights movement that was
undermining the basic fairness of
women's sports. And that is sort of my
that that's also my larger my larger
perspective here, right? Like I I I
think you know you said you said earlier
that you know maybe you've sort of
learned something about the importance
of dialogue and safe spaces and
compromise and so on. Um
I feel like if you have learned that it
is as the result of overreaching
>> well so I don't so I what I'll say is
that just to respond to the the example
of of Leah Thomas is one thing I'm
worried about is that if we accept the
premise that what we're doing is looking
at people and deciding who is trans that
we as
bystanders um are going to be policing
the bodies of of women athletes. What's
happening now is that the people who are
being pulled aside for quote unquote sex
testing are cisgender girls with short
hair with big muscles. Serena Williams
spent a very significant part of her
career being accused of being a man. Uh
tall, fast women's athletes are often
accused of being men. And so we're
imposing this this type of regime. and
my experience. Uh, and when I say that,
you know, I I I'm open to to dialogue.
I've I've always been open to dialogue,
I just think that right now there is
this false narrative that we were never
in a position to want to compromise when
my experience, my very first experience
talking about women's sports was in the
context of the government proposing a
ban on it. um that conversation was
introduced in order to try to undermine
the ability for LGBT advocates to move
basic non-discrimination protections. So
we didn't we didn't introduce a
conversation about sports or about
restrooms. And I think that that's an
important part of this history following
Oberafell, following the Supreme Court's
decision striking down bans on marriage
equality and the efforts in Charlotte,
North Carolina, in Houston, Texas to
pass non-discrimination ordinances,
which people continued to say are
largely popular. That's where we started
to hear about trans people using the
bathroom and then subsequent to that
about trans people in sports. And we did
not introduce those
>> as [clears throat] right as as
activists. You're saying you didn't
introduce those debates
>> as activists. And we weren't we weren't
asking for inclusion in those spaces. We
were asking to not be fired from our
jobs to not be kicked out of hotels. Um
and that was the step that started in
2016 and was met with a campaign about
predators in bathrooms.
>> I want to ask then about
Yeah. about coexistence, I guess.
Because to me, part of the framing
of this debate from your side in the
last few years has been
a narrative of
threat, right? And
again, not only the kind of policy steps
that the state of Tennessee has
undertaken, right, or that the Trump
administration has undertaken,
but just a straightforward claim like I
as a parent of girls would not want them
to compete against someone like Leah
Thomas, right? like that that those
those kind of those kind of arguments
were often
met in my experience by a claim that
just the arguments themselves did a kind
of profound psychological harm to
trans youth to kids dealing with
extremely difficult physical,
psychological, political circumstances,
right? that essentially, you know, sort
of interventions for trans youth were
essential to prevent suicide. But it
wasn't just about suicide. It was sort
of a general narrative. I I felt like um
that to be skeptical of
the claims of the movement. there was a
sense that um
yeah that that this was this was sort of
an act of almost [snorts] violence
against transgender people and you know
we've had we've had an extended
conversation
>> here we're trying to land land the plane
right but
>> I'm just curious like
>> do you feel threatened by
skepticism and critique
I
>> in this in this in this area like if I
if this is the last thing I'll say then
they can answer. If I say to you right
>> that I I believe this is a free country
and I think that people who have deep
and profound dysphoric experiences of
their own body should be free to
identify as the opposite sex as adults.
But I also think that you know a lot of
a lot of the interventions offered to
transidentifying teenagers are going to
be remembered as dangerous pseudocience
that did damage. If I say if that's my
position and it is my position, right?
Do you feel like that position can
coexist with
basic American liberties for transgender
Americans or do you need to win? Like,
do you need to sort of have my position
ruled out of bounds to feel like
[snorts] you've made America safe for
transidentifying youth?
>> Well, I certainly don't think your
position should be ruled out of bounds.
I I don't want you to not have the
position that you have. That's core to,
you know, what you see and experience in
in the world.
>> Well, no, but you'd like you'd like to
talk me out of it at least.
>> Of course, I would, but I also don't
think it's I mean, what I guess what
does it mean to be out of bounds? Like,
I would like to persuade you. I think
that and and I'm an I'm here I'm an
adult. My job is to talk to people who
disagree with me. So I I don't feel
profoundly threatened by it. I think
it's a matter of scale, too, because
when you have hundreds of millions of
dollars going into telling a story to
the American people, that 1% of the the
population is a threat, that that does
have an an impact. That does make people
feel unwelcome in the American promise
to feel like that this every time
there's an election the entirety of
political ad spending will be spent on
saying that we are a threat that we need
to not be part of the fabric of of
society. that is how it's in interpreted
for for a lot of people and I understand
that because we don't have the capital
to respond in any meaningful way to that
that type of ad spending. Um so I think
part of what I experience that people
say is upsetting and and and dangerous
at times and alienating to young people
is is the magnitude. And I I think a lot
of us wish we could just be ignored and
that the amount of resources that have
gone into putting a spotlight on us is
something that I think is greatly
disproportionate and very harmful. Um
and so so that's one thing. And then as
to sort of what are you say what you
what you asked about your position and
and it being out of bounds. I do think
that banning healthc care um for minors
when it's recommended by their doctors
and consented to by their parents and
preventing us from getting more
scientific information about it. I think
that violates the constitution and I do
think it's harmful. But that just I I'm
>> I'm we're really going to end but that
but that is premised right on a very
specific
>> argument about what you think medical
evidence shows right because you would
you would agree that states have the
right to ban medical procedures that
turn out not to work as advertised. So
in
>> so yes I I I I agree that my view of the
evidence the clinical evidence and the
research evidence is that these these
are safe and effective um and that the
proposals uh to you know provide only
therapeutic interventions or or do
nothing are not supported by by evidence
at at all. That is that is my my
position. I would also say that it
sounds like most of the time where we
are is that we're the that people are
debating the quality of the evidence and
I I don't think it is very common for
the government to ban a medical
treatment um when it is being debated
and I think a lot of these states have
right to try laws um that are not
limited even you know to context and
with when when someone is is terminally
ill that allow individuals and parents
to try interventions that that they
want. there's a there is a long history
of that. Um there is a history in these
southern states of allowing people to
take ivormectin to treat COVID just
after it was proven not to be effective.
So so I think there when we're talking
about disagreement about the science I
think it is very unusual for for the
government to come in and impose a
blanket ban.
>> But it's just very hard to escape the
philosophical question I feel like.
Right. So I'm you know I have a lot of
personal experience with wanting to use
medications that not every doctor would
prescribe. I, you know, had, uh, chronic
medical condition that was not widely
scientifically recognized. Uh, and I've
actually had, you know, I wrote a book
about that subject and had a couple
people write me notes saying, "Did this
change how you think about the trans
issue?" Right?
And I guess it depends on
what you think
in the end the reality of the final
category is right like is there a
category a real a real category of
people who are fundamentally born in the
wrong body. I know that's a that's not
that's not the politically favorable way
of describing it. Right? in which case
you are treating you are treating them
by changing the physical reality of
their body. But if it is just a kind of
psychological
you know severe sincere profound sort of
psychological condition that doesn't
have this kind of almost metaphysical
reality. Right?
That's why people react to it like, you
know, you're telling teenagers to
essentially sort of go to war with their
own bodies. I feel like it's hard to get
around
that debate of like what is what is
health, right? What is health for the
transgender person?
>> Yeah. I I guess you know for me it feels
it feels profound. It feels
metaphysically,
holistically, physiologically,
biologically who I am that I couldn't,
there was no choice to be made. Um, and
that is how most of the people that I
know talk about it.
>> Um, and experience it. And it also means
that I can't always put it into words
that are going to make sense to another
person. Um, and I believe that health
for the transgender community is
continuing to make space for us to learn
about how to best interact with and
treat our bodies. Um, right now what I
think we're seeing is the cutting off of
a lot of information. And I do
appreciate you saying that you think as
an adult that I can make that decision
or or others do. I I think there are
many people who are starting to encroach
on the ability of adults to make these
decisions even as
all sorts of things are widely available
to to adults in the United States. And
that to me signals um how much there is
a desire to stamp out aspects of who we
are um in a in a broad way.
>> All right, [music] Chase Strangio, thank
you so much for joining me.
>> Thanks, Ross. Thanks for having me.
Hey,
hey, hey.